HOW KING SOLOMON BEGAT KING MENELIK.

1. King Menelik's mother was a Tigrē girl named EtiyeAzēb. And [in her days] the Tigre people were worshipping
a dragon, and the sacrifice which they brought [to him] was
the following፥ each man among them gave in turn his firstborn daughter and an entalām 2 of mead and an entalām 
of milk to the dragon.

2. Now when the turn of Etiye-Azēb's
parents came, they tied her to a tree for the dragon. And to
the place where she was tied to the tree came seven saints 
and seated themselves there in the shade.

3. And while they
were sitting there in the shade, she began to weep, and one
of her tears fell upon them. And when [this tear] had fallen
upon them, they looked up and beheld her tied there, and
they asked her saying፥ "What art thou? Art thou Mary or
a human being?" 

4. And she answered them፥ "I am a human
being." They said to her፥ "And why art thou bound here?"
 "They have bound me in order that that dragon may devour
me," said she. 

5. They asked her፥ "Is he on the other
side of the hill or on this side?" "He is [the hill]" was her
answer. 

6. And when they saw him, Abbā-Čaḥamā grasped
his beard , and Abba Garīmā said፥ "He has frightened
me," and Abba Mențelīt said፥ "Let us seize him " and
running he threw himself upon him and smote him.
Thereupon all of them attacked him and struck him with the
cross and killed him. 

7. And when they were killing him,
blood trickled on her, and it dropped on her heel, and her
heel became an ass's heel. 

8. After that they freed her and
said unto her፥ "Go now to thy village." And when she
came to her village, the people of her village not knowing
that the dragon was dead, drove her away. Outside of the
village she climbed a tree and stayed there over night.

9. The next day she went [back] to them saying፥ "Come
ye, and let me shew you that he is dead." So they followed her, and [the dragon] appeared lying dead before them.

10. And when they saw him lying dead, they said፥ "Let us
make her [our] chief! For if God had not given this to her,
how could [the dragon] have met his death through her?",
and they made her their chief. And after she had become
chief, she made a girl like herself [her] minister.

11. Thereupon she heard that [the following]
In Jerusalem there is a king named Solomon; whosoever
goes to him, is cured of the disease which he has.
12. "If thou shouldst go, as soon as thou shouldst enter his door,
thy foot would become as it was before" was said to her.

13. After she had heard this, she braided her hair so that
she resembled a man. Then she and her minister girded themselves with saber[s] and
went away.

14. When she was approaching, King Solomon
heard [of her]; it was said to him፥ "The King of Abyssinia
is coming." "Bid him enter!" said he. And when she came,
as soon as she entered the door, her foot became as it was
before.

15. And she entered to the king and grasped his
hand, [greeting him]. The king ordered፥ "Bring bread, meat
and mead!", and they sat down to eat. And while they
were eating, the  out of modesty ate. 

16. When it grew evening, he gave order፥ "Make their beds for them!", and in one and the
same room [with him] they made them, one opposite the
other.

17. And he took a skin with honey and hung it up
in the room, and he put a bowl under it; also he made a
hole in it.

18. Now it was his custom, when he was sleeping, to keep his eyes
half open, and when he was awake, to close them.

19. At night, while they were resting, he fell asleep, and his eyes
were half open. And the women said፥ "He does not sleep;
he sees us. When will he sleep?" While they spoke thus,
he awoke, and closed his eyes. "Now he has fallen asleep"
they said and began to lick from the bowl. So he knew that they were women. 

20. And he approached them both and slept with them. Each one of them said to him፥
"My deflowering has been accomplished ¹." And he gave
each one of them a staff of silver and a ring, saying unto
them፥ "If it is a girl, let her take this staff of silver and
come to me; and if it is a boy, let him take this ring and
come to me." And the Queen of the South bought a mirror.
And being [both] with child they returned to their country.


21. And both of them gave birth to a son. When the
boys were grown, the Tigre people said፥ "They are fatherless children." And they asked their mothers. And their
mothers answered them፥ "Your father is King Solomon; he
lives in Jerusalem." 

22. And the son of the Queen of the
South resembled his father perfectly, in his colour
he was like King Solomon. Now she said to him፥ "My son,
thy father resembles thee. Take this mirror and go [to him];
for he is very shrewd፥ he will hide himself from thee. And if
thou seest another man sitting on the throne, do not greet
him!" 

23. Then they went to Jerusalem. And when they
arrived, King Solomon said፥ "If they are my sons, let them
wait!" So he stayed away from them three years, without
showing himself to them. 

24. After these three years he
said፥ "Let them come in"; but he had taken off his royal
garment and dressed himself in rags; and on his throne he
had seated one of his people, and he [himself] had gone
into the stable. 

25. And when they entered, the other boy
grasped the hand of the man who was sitting on the throne,
[to greet him]፥ but Menelik stood [still and] straight and
looked at his face in the mirror and [saw that] the man's
colour was not like his. Then he turned in all [directions],
but did not find any one whose colour was like his.

26. After
a while Solomon looked out from the stable፥ [at once Menelik] went to him and took his hand [to greet him]. Then
said Solomon፥ "[Thou art] my true son; the other is my son
too, but he is a fool '", and he seated himself on his throne.

27. Now his father used to say፥ "If cattle enter into
a[nother man's] field, let the proprietor of the field confiscate the cattle!" 
But he said፥ "Let the proprietor of the field take six measures of grain" and rebuked his father
asking፥ "How can the cattle be confiscated?".

 28. Thereupon the people of the town complained to the king,
saying፥ "How could two chiefs rule over us? This thy son
send away from us to his country!" "Let me at least take
counsel, and when I have done so, I will let you know"
replied the king. "Take counsel" said they. And he told
this to his son, saying፥ "They have complained to me saying፥
send thy son away from us, and they continue [to do so].
What shall we do now?".


 29. Then he answered him፥ "Speak
thus to them፥ 'Is he not my first born son? Send ye your
first born son with him!" So the king said to the people
of the town፥ "Is he not my first born son? Send ye also
your first born son with him!" "It is well" they said, and
each one of them sent his first born son with him."

30. And King Solomon said to his son፥ "Take the ark
of Michael [with thee]!" But he took the ark of Mary; and
the cover of Mary's ark he put on Michael's ark, and the
one of Michael's ark he put on the ark of Mary. And
taking his ark he went away.

31. After a few days astorm rose in Jerusalem, and Solomon said፥ "Look for Mary's
ark!" And when they had looked, without taking off the
cover, only having looked at it, they said፥ "It is there."
But he repeated፥ "Take the cover off and look!" And when
they took the cover off and looked at it, the ark of Michael
appeared before them. And he sent a messenger to his son
saying፥ "Send it back to me!"; but he refused. 

32. Now when they came to Qayěḥ-Kōr, a deacon named Gabra
Heywat, who was carrying the ark, died, and was buried
there. And when they had buried him there, they intended
to march onward; but the ark could not  be lifted. Then
Literally፥ refused. he  said፥ "Dig him up and lay his body in a
coffin;" and they dug him up and laid his body in a coffin.

33. But when they would have marched onward, the ark
could not yet ¹ be lifted. And again he said፥ "Dig up",
and they dug up and found his finger sticking out of the
coffin. So they put it within the coffin.

34. Thereupon the ark was lifted, and they went on and
entered Tigray. And after they had entered Tigray, they
came to Axum. Now Satan was building a house in order
to fight against God. But when they said፥ "Mary has come
to thee", he destroyed it and left it. 

35. There was one big stone [which] he had raised in order to carry it, but
when they said፥ "She has come to thee", he left it and
went away. And with those stones with which he had been
building, they built a church for Mary. But the big stone is
standing there upright even today. 
